# Introduction

## Open Source Licensing Models
tbd

## Linux Operating System

OS is a set of software tools that can be translated so that an host computer can be understand.<br/>
command line interface cli

The Linux kernel is Free. This freedom gives customization, flexibility and virtualization.

The Linux environment consists of 3 kind of software:
1. The Linux kernel itself --> handles system hardware resources on behalf of the OS users
1. The desktop interface for example GNOME, KDE and Cinnamon 
1. A linux distribution with a specific suite of system tools (software packages)like RedHat or Ubuntu.

### Linux Distribution
A distribution is a version of the OS. For example Android for mobile devices, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Raspian for Raspberry PI and Ubuntu.

The distribution families are:
- Debian: Ubuntu, Mint and Kali Linux
- Red Hat Enterprise Linux: CentOS and Fedora
- SUSE: OpenSUSE
- Arch Linux: LinHES and Manjaro

# Linux Environment
## The Linux Boot Process
A computer wakes itself up launching an operating system. 
Old motherboard comes with a mini OS hard-coded in the HW. BIOS
BIOS = Basic Input Output System, while the new ones have UEFI = Unified Extensible Firmware Interface. This SW is assigned to a limited number of tasks. It takes a survey of the HW resources conencted and avaiable to look for a MBR (Master Boot Record) on boot disk launched. Then if it is a linux machine, the Grand Unified Bootloader (GRUB) will execute and load the OS kernel in the memory, making it available to the users.

CTRL+ALT+T Open the Linux terminal

cd boot
ls // list stuff
less grub.cgf // to read the configuration fiels 



