# Getting Started With Linux

## Licensing
1. FSF - Free Software Foundation: it allows the user to do freely what they want to do it. GPL
1. Open Source Initiative, more flexible licensing avaiable. The original programming source is make available to users. BSD distribution

## The Linux Operating System
Created by Linus Torvalds.

OS gives access to storage device, cpu . All desktop OS provide access through GUI or cli. 
The Linux Kernel is Free. 

## The Layers of a Linux Distribution
Targets:
- phone
- pc
- raspberry pi

LVM: Local Volum Manager: if you have multiple drives you can  combine different volumes. 

## The Linux Boot Process

BIOS = Basic Input Output System
UEFI = 

The boot process takes a survey of the hardware resources which are available and it look for  a storage device with a viable Master Boot Record. 
Then for a linux system the Bootloader called GRUB is launched, the kernel will be loaded into memory.

CTRL+ALT+T opens a new cml linux

## Linux Runlevels

0 system halt: shut the system off
1 single-user (rescue) mode: work without connectivity
3 multi-user mode without GUI: multi user systems 
5 multi-user mode with GUI
6 reboot
Linux gives the ability to use simulteneus access 

`systemctl` get-default" shows the run level target that is currently active.
you can change the target with
`systemctl isolare rescue.target.`
`systemctl enable multi-user`

## Linux FileSystem Hierarchy Structure

* `/bin`: Binary files for single user mode commands (i.e. copy move)
* `/sbin`: Binary files for multi-user commands: system binary files only accessible in multi users sessions
* `/boot`: Linux images and boot configuration files
* `/dev` Pseudo files representing devices
* `/etc` Configuration files: configuration files used by the software system account, where configuration programs exist 
* `/home` User files, keep their own private files
* `/lib` Software library dependencies: needed by binary programs
* `/root` Root user files : directory usually not used because admin won't log in as a user
* `/usr` Additional binaries: non essential commands binaries
* `/var` Updating files (logs, app data, cache): files whose content is likely to be updated often (email for example)
* `/proc` Files representing running system processes
* `/dev` Pseudo files representing devices: hardware devices in devices drivers
* `/sys` Data on system and kernel resources: system resources and kernel features

POSYX

## Managing HW
### What is a server?
A server is any computer on which there's at least one process running whose job is the one of serving a remote user called a client.

Server racks have better cooling down fan and the space is maximized to have it organized in racks.

- df -ht ext4
- lsblk | grep sd
- dmesg | grep wl
- less /etc/default/grub
- export myval

Server virtualization is a technique to partition resources of a computer to create subsystems where each subsystem will launch an operating system 


# References
1. https://bootstrap-it.com/linux-start/