# Linux System Administration

**Contents**
[TOC]

## Monitoring System Resources
Why doing system performance measuring?
1. identify rogue processes
1. understand capacity usage

/proc directory contains a lot of virtual files containing system events. The file are virtual because they are created dynamically  at every system boot

less meminfo contains information about capacity and usage level of your system memory

less cpuinfo tells me about cpu

top : provides a single automatic updating data containing mem and cpu %

free: you can check how much memory available you have. 

free -h gives the percentage

df -ht ext4

## monitor process events

### ps
Display any process running in the current shell

### ps aux | wc

### ps aux | grep sshd
sshd usr/sbin/sshd 

### dmesg
It is for managing messeges coming from the kernel ring buffer. The kernel ring buffer is where the log messages from boot are stored. 

### snap list

### ststemctl status
it shows the status of a process. There should be 'active' and 'running'

### journalctl 
To query and display logs

Other way can be:
```sh
cat /var/log/syslog | grep sshd
```
### nice
Used to set process priorities

## Working with Users and Groups
Admin Powers best practices:

- avoid using the root account
- create unique account for each user
- assign only necessary authority to each user
- use admin power only via sudo: the account needs to have sudo permissions to have admin powers

### Check privileges associated to a user name

```sh
$ id losi
uid=1002(losi) gid=1002(losi) groups=1002(losi),4(adm),20(dialout),27(sudo),30(dip),46(plugdev)
```
### who
Which user currently login when their session being and where they come from (ip address)

### w
It gives the information of `who` plus what they are doing

### last
It gives you a list of all system logins since the begin of the month

### Create a new user
Create a user to the root
```
sudo useradd -m jane
```

In home/jane there will be three hidden files:
- .bash_logout
- .bashrc
- .profile

The same three hidden files are present in the `etc/skel` which is known as the skeleton directory of the new users.

```sh
sudo passwd jane
```
will create a password for that user.

```sh
sudo groupadd secret-group
```
to change ownership properties

```sh
sudo chown :secret-group /var/secret/
sudo usermod -a -G secret-group jane
sudo chmod g+w /var/secret
```

## Securing Your Linux Server
### permissions
Every object in a file linux system has unique metadata.

```sh
ls -l
- rw- rw- r-- jane james
```
There are ten characters that belong to 4 groups:
1. d: directory, - not a directory
2. permissions of the owner rw-: the owner can read the content, write the content, - no execution rights (represented by x)
3. permissions of group members
4. rights of all other root users

jane: file owner is jane
jane: group is jane

When using sudo you act as root.

change own `chown` operation change group but not the owner.
To change mode use `chmod`. `o` indicate others, `+` adding a power, `x` means execution power.
```sh
chmod o+x data.txt 
```
| What | symbol | number|
|------|---|---|
| Read | r | 4 |
| Write| w | 2 |
| Execute | x | 1 |

Full permissions: 7
Read/execute: 5
Execute: 1

symbolic link: it create a link to the source file in the location you need. This prevents to create copies which will be hard to maintain. The symbolic link is used for example when we have to run a script and with this we can avoid typing the full path of the script. 

### Hardening Your Sever
#### software patches
Dpkg team they do security patches, it is your responsibility to update the system through the package manager. 

```
# apt upgrade
# apt update
# dnf update
```
#### managing network ports
A network port is a number between 0 and 65535 that by accepted convention can be interpreted by a server to direct incoming requests, Ports can permit a single network IP address to be used for multiple services.

three lines of defenses:
- restrict ssh session to users with valid key pair
- port control: close unused ports. A port is open if there is a software running on a machine listening to that port. Closing a port means to shut down that software
- well designed Firewell: it is made up of rules that reply to every packet coming from a network, the packets can be blocked, some will be allowed

nmap is a tool to close ports

#### data encryption
Files are encrypted and authorized users have decryption keys

## Working with Docker and Linux Containers
Server virtualization is a way share the resources of a single physical server among multiple running operating systems. 

A container is build to share a single kernel with its host, meaning that the core might take few kilobytes of disk spaces. Container virtualizations are linux.

### Docker Ecosystem
The core puzzle system is the image. You can download pre built image or build your own. 
To define/customize your own image is by writing a Dockerfile which is  a script that declares the components and environments of your image. 
It's common to start with a reference to a OS space. The you can add software with the stands package manager command. Every new command adds a new layer. 
Image hosting via a Docker hub, docker registry. 
The container save data like a physical server. Keep in mind that 
containers and locally stored data aren't meant to persist over long term

#### some key take-away:
apt-get is more reliable than apt in script settings

