# What is Bluetooth LE
[TOC]
## BLE vs Bluetooth Classic
Bluetooth Classic is the version of Bluetooth you have most likely used before due to its prevalence in common items such as wireless headsets. It is quite evident that Bluetooth is a perfect fit for applications such as streaming music. The data throughput is high enough to support it without connection problems or packet loss, plus it’s very easy to use. You probably need to recharge your smartphone and your wireless speakers after some time, but that is not a problem in this kind of application.

However, for low-power wearables or massive IoT applications, frequent battery charging is not feasible, especially when such high data transfer speeds are not necessary. Therefore, starting from Bluetooth Core Specification version 4.0, the Bluetooth SIG (Special Interest Group) introduced Bluetooth Low Energy (LE), with the intention of making it a key enabler for low-power IoT applications.

## Bluetooth LE features
Bluetooth LE, as its name implies, focuses on achieving low energy consumption by sacrificing data rate. Sacrificing data rate refers to two mechanisms here. Firstly, data packets are made smaller, ranging from 27 to 251 bytes. Secondly, data is being sent as seldom as possible to avoid long radio-on times, which is a significant factor in power consumption. This makes Bluetooth LE more suitable for battery-operated devices that need to operate on minimal power and only send small bursts of data.

Bluetooth LE differs from Bluetooth Classic in other aspects as well, such as supported topologies and node types. This is because Bluetooth LE was intended for completely different use cases than Bluetooth classic, therefore different network topologies were necessary.

The table below summarizes some of the key aspects of Bluetooth LE.

- Operating band	2400 MHz – 2483.5 MHz~ 2.4 GHz
- Channel bandwidth	2 MHz
- Number of RF channels	40
- Maximum transmit power	20 dBm 0.1 W
- Maximum application data throughput	1.4 Mbps
- Maximum range at reduced data rates (125 & 500 kbps)	~1000 m

## The Attribute Protocol
